Downloaded from
YTS.MX
Official YIFY movies site:
(Ominous music)
[Director] This is a film
about storytelling.
About how we tell the story
of our country's past.
Why do we want to believe
one version and not another?
Maybe because it makes
us feel safe at night.
There's one episode
of America's history that is
told very differently.
depending on who you
are and where you live.
It is the story of our civil
war and what came after.
(explosion)
(drums)
- The hot winds of
war blew across
the land. made of it
a country divided.
Friend turned into foe.
brother fought against brother.
It was such a long
and drawn out
struggle and a feeling
on both sides was so intense.
- We're all just romantics lost
in contemporary times.
you might say every one of us
feels like we born
125 years too late.
(slow music)
- To introduce myself.
my name is Rachel Boynton.
This is Nelson Walker.
We are independent
documentary filmmakers.
We're making a film about how we
tell the story of the Civil War.
We're filming in lots of
different schools
all over the country.
And going to places with a deep
connection to this history.
(loud cheering)
- There's a lot more coming.
[Student] What made you choose
the civil war
and reconstruction?
[Director] Well. you know.
America is kind of like a big
family that tore itself
apart during the civil war.
And in order to make peace.
we told ourselves
a certain story about it.
And for a long time.
we had trouble telling
the difference between
that story and the truth.
You can ask me
anything you want.
[Student] What did you
want to do when you
were little and did you have
a backup for if you
couldn't get that?
[Director] When I was really
little. I wanted to be Superman.
When I got a little bit older. I
wanted to be an anthropologist.
Do you know what an
anthropologists is?
- No
- Somebody
who goes around the
world and studies the way other
people live like this.
- So like this?
[Director] Kind of like this.
Yeah.
[Isabel] People are
having to come
to grips with the civil war
and enslavement.
which are the sort of founding
bases of the country.
Our country is like
a really old house.
You may not want to go
into that basement.
but if you really don't go
it's at your own peril.
Whatever you're
ignoring will be
there to be reckoned
with until you reckon with it.
(ominous music)
(children talking)
[Instructor] These voices
were all happening
on the eve of the civil war.
I'm interested in what
you think about it.
I'm interested in who.
who's saying this.
And I'm also
going to give you
the secession documents
from South Carolina.
Where is he from?
What's what's he about?
Who is he?
[Student] He's a Philadelphia
congressman. I believe.
[Instructor] No. Ohio.
I think he's from Ohio.
So he delivers this when?
When is this written?
Because that's one of the
questions that I asked.
- December. 22nd. 1860.
[Instructor] Exactly.
And what is he basically saying?
- He doesn't
want secession
because he knows
if there is secession
there will be a huge war.
[Instructor] People will know
this war with their own eyes.
They will. you know. really
experience war amongst
ourselves.
He sounds scared. doesn't he?
[Student] Yeah.
[Instructor] Yeah.
I think he probably was.
What stood out to you
in the arguments?
[Student] So our article
was presented
by Alexander Stephens
in Atlanta. Georgia.
And not once does
he talk about
slavery. property
and what the war is really
about. what they're really
fighting for.
[Instructor] Other voices?
Yeah.
[Student] I noticed
there seems to be
a common idea that the civil
war was totally about slavery.
I'm going to disagree with that.
The South did want to leave
the union because of slavery.
but the issue of the Civil War
was keeping the south
in the union.
So slavery isn't like
the entire issue.
- Push back? Comments?
(school bell rings)
We will continue tomorrow.
(student chatter)
[Instructor] You are a thinker.
That is for sure.
The wedge is the slavery
issue. right?
I think we're agreed on that.
It's just a way
of describing it.
Yeah.
Good. good job.
Go. go. go.
[Director] You're
spending a lot of time
telling the story
of the Civil War
and Reconstruction in your
eighth grade class.
Why?
- Because I think
we have not adequately.
you know. understood
who we are as a nation.
There's so much of this history
that has been way too difficult
for this country to look at.
The reason it's important
to understand this history is
because we carry it within us.
These things need to be unpacked
and looked at and talked about
and and we need to decide
what we think about them now.
It's challenging. but it's.
it's where the juice is.
(distant dog bark)
- We call it a war between
the states here.
We don't call it a civil war.
[Director] Why is it
important to cause
the war between the states?
- Because that's what it was.
It wasn't a civil war.
[Herb] Or the war of
northern aggression.
The North came down
here and divided us.
We didn't go up there.
- My grandmother was saying they
had to hide the food
in the chimney because
the soldiers came in.
would take everything they had.
They took all their livestock.
any food that was in the house.
It was terrible.
And the war took place
in our backyard.
But the people up north.
the war was a distant thing.
We're both members of the local
Sons of Confederate Veterans
and we are responsible for
taking care of this cemetery.
But I'm afraid when the Herb
are gone and our
generations. that it'll.
there's not gonna be anybody
around to take care of it.
[Herb] Or to promote
the true history
of the 1860-1865
period of time.
[Director] This class
that I'm filming.
the teacher is teaching the
cause of the war is slavery.
- Oh. really?
[Director] And so
does that offend you?
[Herb] Yes.
[Director] can you
explain to me why?
[Herb] Because it's not true.
You're telling stories
that aren't true about
my my ancestry. about my family.
about my country. the south.
[Director] And what's.
tell me what
the untrue thing is?
[Herb] Slavery.
They are not
telling the whole story.
Slavery was
one of the reasons.
But but for that professor
to say that economics
had nothing to do with that war
is totally false.
- I would have fought
for the South.
You know why? It had nothing
to do with political reason.
Because my home
was being invaded.
(somber music)
[Dr. Blight] The Confederacy
lost this war big time.
No Americans have ever lost
a war quite like
the Confederacy. lost this war.
(slow music)
White southerners are going
to need to process what
the meaning of that whole
collapse of their
society really is.
And their explanation of their
defeat becomes a narrative.
It becomes a memory.
it becomes the lost cause
tradition
and the lost cause tradition was
this argument
that the Confederacy had
really fought for noble aims.
The war wasn't really
entirely about slavery.
It was about defending their
homelands.
their families. their women.
The slavery was not the great
issue. If it were left to them.
they would have handled slavery
over time and maybe even gotten
rid of it themselves.
they said. which is nonsense.
There were alternative textbooks
eventually published
in the South.
and it wasn't just textbooks
they were trying to control.
It was the stories being widely
told in the public arena.
and they had
a tremendous influence.
So what is at stake
in the memory
of the American Civil War. is
who gets to control this
narrative?
The story.
[Director] Ok. wait. I've got
to move the microphone
before I get started.
Yeah.
Do you have any
questions for me?
[Student] I had one.
I forgot what it was.
Do you consider yourself
a radical person?
[Director] Am I a radical
person?
No. I'm not a radical person.
I think I'm someone
who questions things.
I'm questioning the stories we
tell. like in your class.
the story about slavery. right?
They tell us something
about why we're so divided.
Do you see us living
in a divided country?
- Every day.
(somber music)
(children chatter)
[Student] The Holmes
Central High School creed.
I am a member of the Holmes
Central High School family.
Education first our motto.
[Instructor] The kids that I
have here are determined to not
follow in the footsteps
of what was in the past.
I'm hoping I can spark
something to say.
I want to know more.
I want to learn more.
[Director] In Mississippi.
do people talk about slavery
as the cause of the war?
[Instructor] You don't
really hear the word
slavery or slaves
in Mississippi.
That was an incidental
part of it.
I guess the simple
term is whitewash.
As I told my clients. is that
a lot of time you want to
see the good part
of the history.
especially the history that you
are part of.
and you want to minimize
the bad part about it.
Slavery is not an easy topic to
tackle for black or for white.
[Director] So how do you tackle
the story of slavery?
[Instructor] One thing
is that. the slaves
were more powerful than
you give them credit for.
[Student] People say
that Lincoln freed
the slaves. but you say
actually they freed themselves.
[Instructor] That
was a question?
- Why couldn't
slaves free themselves
in a sense. before all of
this if they freed themselves?
[Instructor] We didn't have the
abolition. We we did have was
Nat Turner. you know. you had
those people who step forward.
Those people to me were
just as brave
as the 1960's.
probably more brave.
[Student] Come on.
[Instructor] Think about
Nat Turner.
[Student] Slave.
He's crazy.
To make a change. you got
to be a little crazy.
[Instructor] That's it. He
calls people to think. He went
from plantation to plantation.
killing everybody.
And he wanted to kill
the women and children.
He wanted to do that. why?
[Student] you expect for a
dude to be dead.
you expect our mother.
three kids. stuff like that
the pay. you got
him. If you want them.
he's dead.
He set the right tone.
You out here killing wives.
children. Oh yeah.
[Student] He probably was
a grumpy slave owner anyway.
[Instructor] Don't take for
granted the lives that were
lost.
Who was brave enough to try
to system when it's wrong?
That's what makes these
guys to be heroic.
We can't devalue what we did.
A white guy whose grandfather
was a confederate and they
can't keep their memory alive.
Why can't we?
[Student] In Holmes County.
I noticed how we had
the Browns and the Williams.
I mean. we also had Caucasian
people with the same last name.
And I was I always
wondering. like.
is there a relation
between the two?
And then I learned that.
you know. slaves got their last
names from their slave owners.
So is like. did
this family own this
family or like did they? I
always wondered about that.
[Director] There's this
enormous history
of slavery in Holmes County.
Do people ever talk about that?
[Student] About?
[Director] Just the question
of the history of slavery here?
- No.
[Director] Do you know if your
ancestors were enslaved here?
- I don't know.
[Director] Would you
want to know?
- Not really.
[Director] Why?
- Because I don't
want to
think about what all they
went through for us.
[Director] How come?
- Because they
worked for all their life being
enslaved and not
being treated right.
They'll just bring
me down because they suffered
and I wish somebody could've
did something back then
to help them out.
[Director] And so you don't
want to think
about it because
it makes you sad.
- Mm hmm.
- I don't want
to hate people.
And I want to hate
people based on their
character towards me now.
not what they did
hundreds of years
to go or their family did
hundreds of years ago.
[Director] I think white
people are afraid
that it's going to make
them feel ashamed.
- Yeah.
I think so. too.
That's why it's. they probably
when they're teaching.
I know I keep going back to.
you know. the teaching. But it's
where it all starts
because I doubt you. if
a white man would tell his six
year old daughter.
we own slaves or we did
this to slaves or like.
I doubt if that happens.
- I think we all should
learn the real history because
as black people. we think
we know. but we don't.
I never met my great
grandmother. and. you know.
they don't talk about slavery.
and the racial desegregation.
They don't talk about it.
[Director] Would you want
to ask her about it?
- I would.
but I wouldn't.
I think she would say she don't
know. to avoid the conversation.
[Director] And why do
you think she would
want to avoid the conversation?
- It might hurt her.
she might feel mad about it.
[Director] It's hard to talk
about things like that.
- Yeah.
(slow music)
[Instructor] It's personal
around here. we're in a southern
city and we're talking
about the civil war.
And I'm going to have students
who are pulling
for the Confederacy.
I was that student. I pulled
for the Confederacy
because they're southern.
I'm Southern. right.
And it's not about
slavery in your mind.
It's just like it's the Cowboys
versus the Redskins.
And you want the Cowboys to win
the football game. right?
That's what it is in their head.
So when you throw slavery
in there. it complicates it.
It's not a football game.
This was real.
Most history classes we teach
that the winners write
history. the civil war.
the losers end up
writing the history.
When we look
at Southerners and how they try
to twist the narrative of what
happens. I want us to put
ourselves in their shoes
and look at why.
If you can teach empathy
when it comes to history.
I think it's such a powerful
thing for the rest
of your lives.
All right. boys. in your packet.
turn to new perspectives
on slavery.
What we've got here are
statistics about slavery.
And I want you to talk about
what jumps out at you.
[Student] It says about
like one point one million
Southern white families owned no
slaves and that only
about three hundred and fifty
a little over 350.000
owned slaves.
That's only like a fourth or
fifth. which actually
a pretty crazy statistic.
So a handful of people have.
you know. one like five slaves
that probably was just around
the household. which probably
were treated pretty well.
[Instructor] Well. it depends.
[Student] Of course. the
southerners were trying to.
you know.
I mean. they weren't treated
like regular humans.
but they they took care of them
because they were like
a way to make money.
[Instructor] Correct.
It's an investment.
That's my money.
I need to take care of my money.
I want that to keep
producing more money for me.
Therefore. I take care of it
and I don't take care of it
and provide. I mean. it's still
a dirt floor they sleep on.
You know. it's still I'm
working 10 to 12 hours.
It's not.
Let's look at 210.
whippings per person.
In the south.
where was the wealth?
So owning land
and owning slaves?
if I invested twenty three
thousand dollars in something.
I don't want to beat
it to a pulp.
Right?
So why do they do it?
[Student] Fear.
[Instructor] Fear. you hit
on it. That's the word.
Here's what American slavery is
about. money and fear.
They are making lots of money
and they are terrified of what
happens if this goes away.
What happens when people talk
about abolition
and emancipation?
What do I start
picturing in my head?
[Student] Getting lynched?
[Instructor] Yes. retribution.
They're going to come after us.
So you could look at and say.
you know. the situation's
not great. but
I don't want to get lynched.
I don't like people throwing
rocks through my windows.
(woman on tv) The violence.
Police officers pointed guns
into crowds of young people.
It was shocking to me.
Why are we still in a war in
this country over race?
- Slavery?
- Slavery. It lasted 200 years.
You have to develop a psychology
on the part of the white people
who are doing this that involves
enormous acts of denial.
We haven't even claimed it as
the horrific system that it was.
- She says slavery is the cause.
And so many white people that we
hear say. don't talk to me about
slavery. I didn't own slaves.
my parents didn't own slaves.
- The cultural conditioning that
began in slavery has continued.
The privileges that you see some
white people have
goes back to. I'm more than you.
I'm better than you.
- Why? why? why?
Why are they better?
- Oh. I don't believe it.
- I know it.
but why do they
think they're better?
- Privilege.
Privilege has told
them they're better.
- I mean. they don't even
know that they're privileged.
I remember a book I read in
seminary.
- Excuse me. I don't buy that.
They don't
know they're privileged.
- They have a
well. no. I serve a congregation
of overeducated white people
who don't recognize
their privilege.
They don't see
that you start that.
It's just the norm.
It's their norm.
- If you don't feel that you
are privileged.
how do you account
for the differences between
white people and disadvantaged
black people?
- They're not comparing
themselves to black people.
Like my white friends are
mostly comparing themselves
to other highly educated.
well-off white friends.
- But when you say white people
can't get it. I don't.
I don't buy it.
- Well. I don't know why
they can't get.
- I don't buy it for a moment.
Since the 60s.
I have been proving myself.
And there comes a point
in life when you say I'm done.
It's on them now
because I know I'm Ok.
So the way I look
at it. is your loss.
I don't intend to spend all
of my life proving to white
people that I'm Ok.
- Don't prove it
just I think we've got to
educate.
We got to educate them.
- No. we don't.
- Well. I'm what I'm
saying is that
there's nothing wrong with
having a conversation...
[Instructor] Last night
I was at this dinner.
it was this conversation about
slavery being the source
of our racial problems.
The topic of white
privilege came up a lot.
You know. the idea of. you know.
white people have
advantages in this country
or.
yeah. I mean. advantages.
Or you could flip it around.
say black people have
disadvantages in this country
simply because of skin tone.
[Student] I feel like it kind
of goes both ways.
Sometimes white people
have a disadvantage.
I had a friend
a couple of years ago.
his cumulative GPA was
like a 4.26
and then he had a friend
that was black
that had like a 3.9
like a 33.
And they both applied
to Princeton
and the black kid got in.
I feel like everyone says. well.
there's a lot of white
privilege. so we have to give
other. like
other ethnicities advantages
in this place instead of trying
to view everyone as
just like an American.
[Student] I mean. just
not talking about
the race issue. just not
bringing it up to the next
generation would
keep them natural in that sense
and they would not be racist.
- I don't
think that slavery
and the Civil War and Jim Crow
should be forgotten.
I think that they should be
remembered because I think
they're an important lesson
that America isn't perfect
and to. like. work against
that in the future.
[Instructor] If you look
at things like
the incarceration rate for.
you know.
young black men in this country.
why it's so disproportional or
why you have the socioeconomic
situations that you have
between. say.
white people and black people.
that you can see this
didn't come out of nowhere.
This isn't a reflection of
the tone of somebody's skin.
It's based in history that goes
back before your generation.
before my generation.
before my grandparents.
It goes way back.
[Student] I think
there's a balance
between recognizing our past.
but also not over talking it
and just overemphasizing
the problem to where it's
always on our minds.
And then it's difficult to be
very equal when that's something
that's always on your mind.
is racism and things like that.
(somber music)
- So please welcome
Dr. Kelly Carter Jackson.
(applause)
[Kelly] So first off.
I want to tell you
a story about one
of my students.
he raised his hand and he said.
who is Harriet Tubman?
I was like. oh. my God.
I tried really hard. you know.
to sort of like as a professor.
you have to. like.
fix your face before I
could answer the question.
He goes. oh. I remember.
She's the woman who wouldn't
get off the bus.
And I was like. no. no.
that's not her at all.
But it's important because I
think it highlights the fact
that we only see. like.
one great black man and one
great black woman per century.
So. Force and Freedom.
my book really tries
to introduce new voices and
to highlight black abolitionist
in particular.
The moment the first black
person is enslaved.
they're pushing back. They're
collecting arms as much as they
possibly can to prepare for what
they believe is inevitable.
and that is the violent
overthrow of slavery.
- There seems to be a kind
of particular resistance
to teaching this aspect
of American history.
And. look and I think.
you know. I'm also a historian
I can understand.
I can dissipate why.
But I just want to get
you to talk about
it takes your book
to underscore force
as well as freedom.
You know.
and we all know that that's
a part of this history. but it's
not taught that way.
[Kelly] It's not taught.
I think.
because we have this
hypocritical. I think.
hypocritical love
affair with violence.
We talk about violence. I think.
in these really romantic ways.
But that's only when we're
talking about white men.
When the situation is reversed.
it is terrifying to think
of black people using force or
using violence to bring
about their freedom.
(crew chatter)
[Director] so I want
to talk to you about
what you've learned so far.
right. in college.
Is there anything you've learned
here about the story
of the civil war that would be
hard to talk about
with people back home?
[Student] Yeah. my
daddy is that typical
Southern male.
a lot of he knows
everything and you
don't question him.
And. you know.
I love him to death.
That's just the way he
is. that's the way people
are down here.
If I told him that the main
cause of the Civil War was
slavery and he would probably
like open the Bible and start
preaching at me and stuff
like that. I don't know.
[Director] How would he
find that offensive?
Well. my
great great grandfather did
fight in the Civil War
and he did come back like he
didn't die or anything.
He came back alive.
But it may set him up so bad.
And it was a bad situation
for my family at the time that
I would not know near enough
about to really like
be able to give details.
But
it's just like a remembrance
of how hard times were
at that time.
because it was really hard
for my family because we're
born and raised in Pontotoc.
Mississippi.
And like in my grandparents
house. there's a no telling
how old rebel
flag like in one of those
flag boxes like this.
And we don't.
you know. take it out.
We don't rub it
in people's noses.
It's just. you know.
up there above a cabinet.
(Rhythmic drum music)
- It has been called the war
brother against brother.
the Civil War
soldier and nation together
found that their fears
and doubts were not so
strong as their faith.
And in national shrines like
Gettysburg.
we memorialize the men of both
sides who gave of themselves
unreservedly for what they
believe to be right.
Remember and be proud.
[Dr. Blight] We've never really
had a racial reckoning.
The problem started first
immediately after the war.
if you want north and south
to get together and get along
again. you don't talk about
causes and consequences.
You talk about the mutual
valor on that battlefield.
(somber music)
Why doesn't that Confederacy.
which only lasted four
years. just go away?
The racial reasons are
paramount. but it also has to do
with this idea that the
Confederacy was a decent.
Man. they went to the limit and
they deserved respect
for all that courage.
They claim after they've lost
that they were only reacting
to the overreach
of centralized federal power.
And there's a kind of admiration
for that still in our culture.
(upbeat music)
- James McGill.
he settled this farm almost 200
years ago. and I felt like I've
followed in his footsteps.
My wife raised the children.
All I ever did was work.
Of course. now. federal
government took my farm.
So
so I had it financed
with federal government.
farmers. home administration.
They wouldn't redo my loans.
During the war
and reconstruction.
People in the South
lost everything.
Well. I can empathize with them.
It made me mad and I couldn't
understand why they were mad.
And they and they spent 150
years and them
people are still mad
in the south about it.
It's wrong for the federal
government to dictate
to the states what they
should or should not do.
And ever since the war. no
one's property has been secure.
And there's a lot of talk
of reparations for slaves.
You know. my great great
grandfather. nobody paid
Abraham Lincoln.
emancipated the slaves.
He didn't get paid for it.
The war to prevent southern
independence changed our
country for the worse.
In my opinion.
- And what do you think?
Do you think the war changed
the country for the worse?
- I'm trying to process
everything.
I do understand
parts of what my father's
speaking on because I feel
that way. that the government is
too big and has too much power.
It's an invasion.
But how long would it take
to free the slaves?
How long would it have taken
for them to realize
that slavery is wrong?
[Director] Do you
think slavery left
an imprint on the mindset
of people in America?
- Sure.
It left an imprint. but
I'm saying the war left
more of an imprint.
That's my personal opinion.
[Director] For black and white?
- Yes.
[Director] So you feel
like the war itself
was a bigger aggression
than slavery?
- Yes.
[Director] It feels like
you're dismissing
the experience of millions
of enslaved people.
It feels like you're
not seeing what they
experienced at the hands of the
people who were enslaving them.
I mean. how is treating people
as property not
a greater horror?
- Well. my feeling was
that it was legal.
It was a settled way of or they
had laws that they
had to live up to and forced
on them and treat them like
civilly.
I don't hate James McGill.
I just want our schools
and universities to stop
teaching our children to hate
our southern ancestors.
They don't deserve that.
(ominous music)
[Director] Do you know what
the Confederate flag looks like?
[Student] Yes. it has a cross
and it's red. white and blue
with stars going
through the cross.
[Director] Where have you
seen that flag?
- I see it
when I'm driving.
when I'm traveling.
I see at. where I live.
I live in the countryside.
and the countryside
I travel to Greenwood and it's
white people back
there. there's no black people.
And I see a lot of Confederate
flags that hang out the houses
to hang out the mailboxes.
I see it on the back
of people trucks.
[Director] And what does
it make you think?
- Grow up.
Basically.
[Director] In class. you said
you were a good public speaker.
- Yes. I am.
[Director] What makes
you a good speaker?
- My projection.
my performance.
When I speak.
I capture your attention.
I know that I capture attention.
I do oratoricals. I've
won first place in
five. six oratoriclas. That's
all of them I
competed in and I won
second place once.
[Director] I hadn't
noticed any white kids
at the school. are there any
white kids at this school?
- No.
[Director] Why is that?
- I would say.
in my personal opinion.
I don't know if this why.
but I will simply say
the fact of segregation like is.
is how we are here. like.
It just socially happened like
this is the black kids school.
Central Holmes is the
white kids school.
that's just how
the neighborhood.
that's how the parents
separated everything.
[Director] Have you ever had
a white friend?
- No.
No. I've never. I've never.
Been around a white person
long enough. I've never had
a complete conversation
to even become associates.
[Director] Do you
think that the civil
war was relevant to your life?
- I feel that
it's relevant because
your past. your
history is your story.
Whether or not you know or
not. it's your story.
(children chatter)
(dramatic music)
- These are the 209.145
African Americans
in the union army.
that fought in the Civil War.
They served in every branch
in the Army. 142 Color
Infantry Regiments.
7 Color Calvary Regiments.
13 Color Artillery Regiments.
and it's color pioneer
regiments.
They looked at each as family
because if you serving
for three years. all you
have is your comrades.
(marching count)
- your left. your left. right.
Who's on your left.
Your left.
your left. your left. right.
your left.
your left. your left. your left.
right.
Company. halt.
So this is the African-American
Civil War Museum.
The monument and museum
were built to correct
a great wrong in history.
America has wrote
a history about
that whole conflict that did not
include African-Americans
and these African-American
soldiers and their great role
in ending that war
to preserve the nation
and enslavement here
in the United States.
The war started.
but for two years.
President Lincoln wouldn't
let blacks join the army.
Well. once he realized he
couldn't win this war without us
then the war starts to change
in Lincoln's favor.
150.000. they were enslaved.
living in those southern states.
They literally end up
with uniforms on and rifles
in their pockets.
So if you're thinking
to yourself. I live in a world
that's out of control
and there's nothing I can do
about it. Well. there is
something you can do about it
and you can
take lessons from these people
whose stories we tell here
in this museum.
I think it's liberating.
[Director] We're making
this film about how
we tell the story
of the Civil War.
And I think you guys just
finished that unit. right?
[Student] yeah.
[Director] What did you think?
[Student] You know. I feel like
it's living in this country is
like. oh. the civil war.
you know about it.
But when you start to learn
about it. there's so many. like.
intricate details
of why things happened.
And I think it's important
that we learn about it.
But the one thing that
does.
like. not concern me. but
most people here have the same
kinds of political views which.
you know. it's great to be
around people
who think like you.
But at the same time. there's
no. like. real conversation.
There's no real dialog
and understanding like
people who have different views
than you. which is. I think.
how we can move forward.
Um. I think that's important.
- And in order for people
to really get your perspective
and understand where you're
coming from. what's one thing
they should know about you?
- Right.
I mean.
the biggest thing
for me is gender.
I try to present as
masculinely as I can. but.
you know. people still sometimes
take me for a girl and that's
like the biggest thing that's
kind of hard for me
to deal with.
Yeah. that's probably the big
that's the biggest one.
[Director] It's like you're not
getting fully seen.
- Right. yeah.
[Dr. Blight] Reconstruction has
been the most
contested question in America's
historical memory.
Reconstruction is a period
of time that begins immediately
after the war.
a 10 to 12 year era when America
had to truly reinvent itself.
Fourteenth Amendment puts equal
protection of the law
into the U.S. Constitution.
And the right to vote for black
men in the 15th Amendment was
a constitutional and legal
revolution.
and some black spokesmen
by the 1890s and the turn
of the 20th century would often
refer to 1865 as the year zero
of a new calendar. a new
beginning to history itself.
But you have to incorporate
the white south
into an American union.
a society
that had just lost approximately
18 percent of its adult
male population in war.
How do you reunify those people
at the emotional level with
the side that is the victor?
- We're having our monthly
Civil War roundtable.
we call ourselves the
East Bridgewater Civil War
Roundtable. named after a town.
- We sent 300 men from this
town.
- I think it was four.
- Closer to 400.
- 50 of them died. The basis
of our meeting tonight.
We call it reconstruction.
You know. what went right
and what went wrong.
All right.
Holy mackerel.
Hello.
What a crowd.
We're going to talk about
reconstruction.
the physical period of time
from from 1865 to 1877.
You know. in the school system.
we came to reconstruction
and the chapter ended
on the Civil War.
- How are you going to rebuild
this part of the country
with malice towards...
as Lincoln's words.
How are you going to do that?
- No one on the civilian side
on the Confederate presidency
was ever forced to concede and
repudiate what they believed.
And we allowed a group of people
that waged an armed insurrection
against their government to
build statues to their heroes.
So that has kept it alive.
We have never solved the core
problem. the civil war.
And that's why reconstruction
didn't have a chance. The north
was fighting back
and forth during
the whole reconstruction period.
And let's not forget
the elephant in the middle
of the room. north and south
were racists. period.
The black was not considered
to be a human being.
- How are ya?
[Director] Excuse me. I have a
question.
Have you ever had
an African-American
member in this group?
Because it struck me
in the conversation about
race that everyone was white.
- No. we haven't.
- Have you looked at
the demographic of east
Bridgewater and the area?
- Where in the 90s.
which is well.
which is an odd thing because we
live. we border Brockton.
which is predominantly
minorities. which are
really the majorities now.
I mean. how do you reach
out to say that they're welcome?
Well. I mean. they're welcome.
but how do you
make them feel that
they're welcome?
I mean. here I think we'd
make them feel welcomed.
How do you how do you do that?
I mean. yeah.
that's a good question.
I'll have to think about that.
The same question is why we live
right next to Brockton and we
don't have a large
population of blacks.
- I live in the town of Kingston
and there's not a large
population of blacks
in the town of Kingston.
You know.
the Silverlake Regional High
School is the fourth or fifth
largest diversified high school
with. you know. 1500 kids in it.
I mean. there are
a few families.
But why? Yet.
you go into Brockton
or you go into New Bedford or
Fall River. the cities.
you tend to find a larger
minority community.
Is it because those minorities
feel more comfortable there?
You know?
I don't know.
I don't have the answers.
* Facing the rising sun *
* of our new day begun *
* let's us march on
til victory is won *
Woo!
[Greg] At the end it says
shadow beneath our hand
may be forever stand.
true to our God.
true to our native land.
See. these guys were tricky.
By native land
what were they talking about?
[Student] Us.
[Greg] Us. our land?
Meaning what? What does
us mean to you?
What was reconstruction?
When was it? After slavery.
Yes.
- After the Civil War.
This was when
black people tried to teach
America how to have a real
democracy during reconstruction.
black people were able to vote
in the South and they got
in the state legislators
and passed laws
to say things like. everybody
should go to school for free.
And they say white people too?
Yeah. white people.
you poor white people.
This man right here.
John Mercer Langston. came
out of slavery in Virginia.
He came to D.C.
as a congressman from Virginia.
This man was born into slavery.
You know. he's crazy.
I got seen. no problem. I'll
be back. You know. I mean.
it's Congressman Langston now.
That's why I love
reconstruction.
You had real heroes.
Are we any different
than these people were?
No. we're not.
You know the difference?
We just don't remember.
My name is Greg Carr and I'm
an associate professor and chair
of the Department
of Afro-American Studies
here at Howard University.
[Director] And what connection
do you have to the history.
to the history of the civil
war and reconstruction?
[Greg] Well.
in addition to the direct
history. my ancestors have
been brought here from
North Carolina and Alabama.
No civil war veterans
in my direct family. but we
were enslaved in Alabama.
So obviously coming
out of civil war.
my family
sharecroppers come in the areas
of Jim Crow. Great Migration
moving throughout the south.
You know. I'm a living part
of that stream of history.
And as a professor here
at Howard University
and particularly in Africana
studies. which is my field
of study in the area I work in.
devote a great part of my work
to understanding
the implications of the civil
war and reconstruction in terms
of contemporary American life.
What's this right here?
[Students] Deed of sale.
[Greg] Deed of sale.
These are reconstruction
era documents.
Most people in the country
don't know anything about that.
So you can say. oh.
we saw the charter. we saw
the deed of sale for the land.
[Director] You know.
you're the only teacher I filmed
who's focused on the freed
people's point of view when
teaching reconstruction.
How does teaching
from that point of view make
a difference for your students?
[Greg] What I hope
they will walk out
with a sense of human purpose
that they have a stake in.
There's always the threat
of forgetting in terms
of national memory.
When you start talking about
a settler state like
the United States that came out
of a settler colony with many
different people.
there's almost a required
forgetting of violence.
of forgetting in order to force
a type of unity of culture.
the unity of national identity.
So the work that remains to be
done is to recognize
our full history.
That story will make you
so proud of black people.
Also. break your heart.
(slow music)
- My name is Brother Rogers.
I work at the
Mississippi Department
of Archives and History.
I created a website
with a picture of every
historical marker in the state.
[Director] Have you taken a
picture of the Clinton
riots marker?
[Rogers] I have taken a picture
of that marker.
I know exactly where it is
near the railroad track
in Clinton.
[Director] That's right.
And what do you think?
Tell me what you're. tell me
what do you know
about that marker?
- Well. I
think that the Clinton
riot marker is particularly
important because there was
a riot during reconstruction
in the town of Clinton.
That was not in the history
books that I read growing up
studying Mississippi history
and the local public schools.
Reconstruction in America.
not just in Mississippi.
is one of the most overlooked
and underappreciated historical
eras. And the people
who wrote about it
afterwards. North and South
wrote about it mainly
from a white supremacy point
of view. whether they were in
Ohio and Michigan or
Alabama or Mississippi.
There was lots of violence
throughout America.
during reconstruction
against African-Americans.
It's a terrible time in our
history from that perspective.
It's a great time again
of experimentation
with providing the rights
of citizenship and political
equality to African-Americans.
Unfortunately. through the lens
of white supremacy.
that was too much for a lot
of white people to take
during that time.
[Director] Are there
any other markers
in Mississippi
that acknowledge
white violence against
African-Americans?
- The only marker of
which I am aware that exist.
that depicts and talks about
white violence against black
people during reconstruction
is the Clinton riot marker.
[Director] In Mississippi?
- In Mississippi.
- My name is Missy Jones.
My title is a Visiting
Instructor of History
at Mississippi College.
[Director] How long have you
been working on the Clinton
riot?
- Almost 15 years now
if I think back.
[Director] What is this?
- This is Johnson
Milling Company.
it's been here for ages.
but right behind it is
the location of the
old train depot.
And the thought was that we
would put the marker
for the Clinton riot here
because of the importance
of the train depot.
The Clinton riots began
on September 4th. 1875.
and the diorama behind me
tells a version of those events.
The original train depot is
where white paramilitary
units flocked into Clinton.
There was a political rally
and it was one of the first
times that African-Americans had
gotten together to really
listen to political candidates.
And it was organized
by the Republican Party.
But there was also a group
of white Democrats who were
sent there to disrupt things.
Shots rang out. African-American
families began
to flee the scene.
Even one mother left her child
in the hollow of a tree
just for protection.
And then over the course
of the next several days.
white liner's began to flood
into Clinton and then
systematically round up those
who organized the rally and then
kill them. sometimes in front
of their own family members.
[Director] So this is
a group of white
Democrats killing the black
Republicans?
[Missy] Correct.
It was the plan of the white
Democrats to keep
African-Americans from voting.
The violence served as a pretext
for the return of white rule
and the end of reconstruction
in Mississippi.
[Director] Do you
feel like people
know that this marker exists?
- No. I don't.
Just given where it is behind
this old mill.
I feel like it has
the potential to look hidden.
And that was my fear
with placing it here.
I would definitely prefer it
to be in a more prominent
location because this event is
by far the most important event
that ever took
place in the city.
The Clinton riot has always been
one of these contested events.
For years and years and years.
it's been told
as if it was caused
by African-Americans. That they
were going to take back
the city. accost the women.
For essentially one hundred
and forty years.
the history was told incorrectly
and the violence was blamed
on the black members
of the Clinton community.
- Hi. my name is
James Robinson.
I'm from here in Clinton.
Lifetime residence. except
for a few years.
- I'm Deborah.
James is my cousin.
- This picture here. Sara Lee.
my grandmother's grandmother.
When she was caught
in the proximity of the
Clinton riot in order
to save her child.
She hid the child in a tree.
And then after the
skirmish was over.
then she went back
and and got the child.
As the article says.
old Clinton history told
from Tales by Ex Slave.
This was published
in the newspaper in 1961.
- As far as the black
citizens in Clinton.
you don't hear
a lot about our history.
And a lot of times I think our
elders have tended to just
discuss things among
themselves as opposed
to bringing it
to the forefront.
Because it can stir
up a lot of emotions.
[Director] And what's
the result
of stirring up emotions?
- You get a lot of good
and you get some bad.
[Director] What's the bad?
- The fact that somebody could
vandalize if you put up
anything.
- I just hope that that
doesn't happen in Clinton.
There's still a lot
of racist attitudes.
- There are some that
and I'm thinking about Missy.
When I first met Missy.
she said the first word
that came out of her
mouth was nigger.
And her parents were so proud
of her when she said that word
because that meant that you
knew you were superior
to somebody else.
[Director] You've been so
dedicated for so long.
You've dedicated so much care
and time and effort to this.
Why do you care about this?
- I'm going to get emotional.
but I grew up in a family
in Mississippi.
My dad was from New York.
my mom's family was from
South Mississippi.
90 percent white.
10 percent black.
still segregated in the ways
in which people
in the communities live.
But I was raised in a racist
family. racist community at
the time in which I grew up.
Things have changed in a good
bit now. but for me. I think
they want to repeat that.
I feel responsibility
with a profession that I've
chosen to tell things
accurately and to not
repeat generational
umm
incorrectness
with my own family. I want
to do something different.
[Student] Why are you passionate
about this project?
Just like what drives you
with making this documentary?
- You know. I didn't
start as passionate.
I started as curious.
- Yeah.
- And I had this sense
that there was something
missing in the story
that I had been taught.
And it's only through
the making of this film
that I've really come to see
that that story
was totally white.
I used to think that white
supremacy means a bunch
of guys in white robes.
but it really means not even
recognizing that we're only
telling white stories.
(southern instrumental music)
[Dr. Blight] During the
reconstruction era.
there's fear
all over the place.
White fear of those black
majority populations. if they
really vote. was colossal.
So many white Southerners saw
this idea of black people
serving on juries.
of black people owning land
as an intolerable revolution.
And it necessitated
a counter-revolution.
even if it necessitated the
use of terror as violence.
A lost cause tradition was
a response to that
tremendous fear.
We like to go to
bed at night
believing our society
is in social order.
I don't have to worry about
my child tomorrow being
confronted by totally
unusual and repugnant ideas or
totally unusual
and repugnant people.
I'm safe by the
history I know.
So the lost cause tradition
that Southerners
developed. this story
for their explanation of their
defeat became ultimately
a victory narrative.
Victory over reconstruction.
And they crushed the very idea
of slavery as the central
cause and the very idea
of emancipation of four
million slaves as the central
result of the civil war.
You begin to see wide scale.
even official efforts to crush
what we might call
black memory.
- If we throw away our
Confederate flag.
we throw away the history
of South Carolina
and of the United States.
- We are true Southerners.
I guess.
To me it's a flag
for everybody.
black and white.
representing our heritage.
Can understand to some degree
how they would have
been upset years ago.
That's been one hundred
and thirty years ago now.
To me. it's our flag.
(crowd chanting)
- White only. no blacks!
Send them home!
[News Reporter] Breaking news.
a horrific scene
in Charlottesville. Virginia.
A white nationalist rally
that descended into deadly
violence and chaos.
- Since the city voted
to remove the
Robert E. Lee statue.
there have been protests.
and now violence.
[Director] Tell me your name.
Who are you?
- I'm Stephanie Rolph and I'm
an assistant professor
of history at Millsaps College
in Jackson. Mississippi.
The images that we're seeing
on our computers and on our
phones and on television.
you can't divorce this
from the need to return
to some sort of
innocent past.
[Director] Like the old South?
- Yes.
[Director] What is the
old South?
- After the Civil War?
The old South myth is this
mythologized place of
big plantation houses
with Corinthian columns and
mint juleps and hoop skirts
and Southern gentleman
and happy slaves.
Everyone is well
taken care of.
Some people are owned by other
people. but everyone is well
fed. well clothed.
loved and appreciated.
And that is not--
this is why something like
this would appeal to white
northerners.
because that's not
the environment
that they lived in.
[Director] It's really a story
about the
merits of white supremacy.
You know.
I filmed with another
historian who said that it was
really white supremacy
that helped the north and the
south reunify after the war.
Do you think that's true?
- I fully believe that
when we're talking.
even across the spectrum
from the coming of the civil
war to the prosecution of it
and the aftermath.
I think it's a much more
productive approach
to describe
and understand white supremacy
than it is to even
talk about slavery.
Slavery doesn't survive.
but white supremacy does.
The war ends.
reconciliation has been
achieved.
what happens unexpectedly is
that in that reconciliation.
the nation itself embraces
the Confederacy and the memory
of the Confederacy.
This is why by the time you
get to the 1930's.
people from all over
the country are coming
to places like Natchez.
Mississippi.
to tour antebellum homes
and to see women in
hoop skirts and people dressed
up as enslaved persons.
This is a vacation for them.
Can you think of a cultural
footprint of this today?
Where the South gets sort
of fetishized?
- Grades second through fifth.
like we used to go almost
every year to the
Destrehan Plantation.
- And what does that
tour include?
- It included tours
of the plantation.
They also had a little show
put on. people dressed up
and stuff. and they sang
songs. played music.
It was like a. it's almost
like a little party.
- Are the tours in any way
engaging enslavement?
- They don't really talk
about the slavery part.
You might have a good time
because. I used to look
forward to going
to the plantation.
It was a big deal.
- I mean. can we even think
about these plantations
as spaces of violence?
When we think about things
like Confederate monuments or
symbols and flags.
all of these remembrances
on white visions. those are
renewals of white supremacy.
And in my mind.
keeping that Confederate
battle flag in the top left
corner of
Mississippi State flag.
is a way to keep
that narrative alive.
And it's threatening because
if we lose it.
what happens to our memory?
(quiet thoughtful music)
- My name is William Shirley.
I serve in the Mississippi
House of Representatives
for District 84. about 16.000
people in the whole county.
Everybody knows everybody.
You get a speeding ticket.
everybody knows.
I'm not here to argue
the design of the flag.
That is not my intent.
Some universities
took the flag down.
If you're receiving state
dollars and you're a public
university. then you should
display whatever
that symbol is.
[Director] And do you
think this is
an issue that matters to the
people in your district?
- Yes. ma'am.
- Why?
- Well. I just think it's a
heritage. it's a history.
There's a big movement to
remove Confederate history.
Well. it's part of history.
You know.
where and when is enough?
[Director] Do you feel like
slavery was something
that was in the past?
Let's move on.
Or do you feel like slavery
still has an effect today?
- It's over and
it is part of history.
it's part of the past.
I don't know of a
person that owns
a slave or has been a slave.
To this day.
I think we're going to make it
a major issue as long as we
keep rubbing it
in from the standpoint
of the minority saying. well.
we were slaves and mistreated.
I understand that.
What the hell do you
want me to do about it?
I'm sorry.
I wasn't there.
I'm 50 years old.
[Director] And what do you say
to historically black
universities that say. we're
not going to fly this flag
because it's
a symbol of slavery?
Do you think about
their point of view?
- It is. It's a state flag
of Mississippi.
[Director] But if they say
it actually hurts us.
it deeply offends us.
it represents something
that gives us pain.
What do you say to that?
- I don't see the pain
in in the symbol.
(chanting and sirens)
- New Orleans is just
the latest city
to start taking
down historical.
but controversial
monuments that many say
celebrates slavery
and the Confederacy.
- White supremacy!
- Must go!
- When?
- Now!
- All right! All right!
We're here to celebrate
the taking down
of the Jefferson Davis statue
here in New Orleans Center.
These were all Jim Crow era
statues meant to emphasize
that white people
were in control.
[Director] Is there any value--
- There is no value
in keeping those statues.
There is value in remembering
what these statues
were put up for.
(people yelling)
- What do you say to the
people across the street
who are marching with flags--
- I don't say nothing
to the people across
the street who are marching.
They are not on my radar.
They are unredeemable
as far as I know.
- We pray. oh Lord. that
those who are attacking
our heritage may
repent of their sins.
We pray. oh Lord.
that the truth of history
would triumph.
[Director] I feel like
the country never
really reunified after the war
in a way that included all
of its citizens. right?
Like maybe taking down these
statues now could
help us reunify.
- But don't try to take away
history just because you
don't agree with it.
And if you really
study history.
you'll see there's more...
It was more than just slavery.
There was taxation issues.
[Director] Hold on.
Is he putting on a--
a bulletproof vest?
- Probably.
- Why?
- Because they were firing
paintball at these
guys the other night.
Sounds harmless.
but who's to say that they
don't try something more?
A lot of these people
from out of town.
- These are visitors
from out of town
who are Confederate
supporters. and they come here
to occupy a city for a couple
of weeks and stand their
ground and all
that good stuff.
[Director] But isn't
the goal to have
more people feel represented?
I mean. don't we need
to listen to each other?
They said the statue's
a source of Southern pride.
- Fuck the south.
Fuck Southern pride.
Umm
The source of all of this
tension and anger comes
from the erasure
of African-Americans. history.
bloodlines. culture.
families for hundreds of years
by way of this thing
that they're upholding.
Ok. so if you can't balance
that in your mind.
then I can't do anything
for your lack of an IQ
or common sense.
I'm sorry.
- It's not about race.
This has never
been about race.
I feel like we're
having our history
stolen from us.
This was our only
Confederate president.
He died here.
- You don't need
to have that in
our diverse neighborhood.
- How is a inanimate
object like a symbol.
affecting you so
gravely that you
cannot see a [inaudible].
(crowd starts chanting)
* Get the fuck out
of New Orleans *
- I pray for America.
I really do.
(crowd cheering)
- Dear God. our
Heavenly Father.
we thank you for your
love and your grace and your
mercy and please bless us
during the coming hour as we
pay homage to our ancestors.
the fifteen thousand two
hundred and sixty five souls
that gave their life to defend
the great state
of Mississippi.
For Christ's sake. Amen.
(all)
- Amen.
- Our next speaker is
someone that I really
appreciate and he's
got backbone.
And that's the kind of people
we need. people to stand up.
Mr. William Shirley
of Clark County.
would you come
say a few words?
Good man!
- Yeah!
(clapping)
- Flag means a
whole lot to me.
You're not going to take the
damn flag down with my vote.
So I'm going to do
all I can do.
And I suggest you find your
legislator and make your ear
known to him or her.
because we all
in the Mississippi house are
going to get to vote on them
amendments again
and again and again.
And they're going to get
tired of seeing me.
And they're going to try
to get somebody to replace
people like me that just don't
go along with y'alls boss man.
If you're taking state
dollars. you fly the flag
of the state of Mississippi.
(clapping)
Thank y'all.
- I'm gonna let our
Mississippi Senator
McDaniel come
up and speak.
(clapping)
- Political correctness
is an incredibly
dangerous doctrine.
It's anti intellectual.
It's anti decent.
It demands conformity.
Do you believe they'll stop
with a monument?
Do you believe they'll
stop with a pattern
or design on a flag?
They ridicule our traditions.
They mock us.
they laugh at us.
You feel like you're losing
your country. don't you?
You feel marginalized.
You're scared.
Mississippi has to stand.
We have nothing
else to surrender.
We are those warriors.
men and women of the soil.
stubborn. courageous.
We stand here on the edge
of history. ready to push
back one more time.
Help's not coming
from California.
It's not coming
from Massachusetts.
It has to be you.
What are you going
to do about it?
(dramatic music swells)
- How would you like to
see Uncle Billy dance?
(children clapping)
(harmonica music)
(tap dancing)
[Dr. Blight] At the end of the
day. historical memory is always
about who is
controlling the story.
And you got to do it
in a society that has this
horrible problem with racism.
The theories of race that most
white Americans.
north or south. still share.
(dramatic music)
By the 1890's
in the north.
there's a tremendous fear
of a world that seems to be
floating into disorder
in these teeming new cities
full of these immigrants
speaking unusual languages.
Maybe the race question should
just be left to the South.
They've always known how
to handle the race question
at the same time.
there will be over nine
million African-Americans.
mostly in the South.
There's no longer the slavery
system that kept
this all contained.
White Southerners need to keep
this burgeoning black
population on the land as
laborers not engaging
in educational advancement.
They need a new system
to keep them there.
The solution in the south was
a system of Jim Crow laws.
Everything from schooling
to voting to transportation.
public accommodation.
every element of life is
now going to be segregated.
Lots of white Americans.
North or South.
can unify around segregation
as a way to keep society
in social order.
The way in which this culture
became within the first half
century after the war.
an American North South
reunion without racial
justice left a deep
set of legacies
we are. of course.
still struggling with.
And every time we think we
have so much of this put
aside. we suddenly are
reminded that we don't.
(crowd yelling)
The only way today we'll see
a new. more inclusive reunion
of Americans is if there's
a coalition of interest
that stops looking only
at their own individual
interest and sees themselves
in these four or five issues
and sees themselves
in other people.
Ok.
[Director] We're just
going to record
the sound of the
room a little bit.
And then if you could
change the frame too.
There you go.
If I were going to make
a movie about you.
what do you want me to make
sure that I include?
- I want you to show like
the great things
that I'm capable of.
Like.
yeah. I'm if if I
do say so myself. I'm a great
football player. but I'm
also smart in the classroom.
I try I try to be-- I'm just
trying to be great in life.
I'm trying to make something
of my life.
trying to be successful.
- To be honest with
you. what I've been through.
There are people who just look
at the good things.
look at the good things.
but I'd rather you see
what the negativity was.
So it's like it counteracts
it's like here's the bad.
But now here where
I'm at. I'm good now.
I'm in a good zone.
I was in-- you know what
I'm saying? It's more like I'd
rather you not just tell half
of my story. I'd rather
you tell the whole story.
- There was this one where a
teacher once described me as
I think it was sympathetic.
I thought she called me
pathetic when she said that.
[Director] It might have
an empathetic.
- Empathetic. yeah.
At the end of the day.
it's just like
you know. we all
have feelings.
We all have like a history
that nobody else knows about.
Yeah.
(thoughtful music)
- I was certainly not taught
this way in my high school.
(all laugh)
So--
- Neither was I!
- I'm always shocked when I
find students of a certain age
who haven't seen
Gone with the Wind.
And I point them to it.
You need to watch that film.
[Kelly] It was the most watched
movie of all time.
People are eating
this stuff up
like there's a real reason why
people have weddings
on plantations.
Like you would never.
you would
never go to Auschwitz and be
like. let's get married.
Like you would never do that.
But we have so made black pain
and suffering like a place
of our enjoyment.
a place that feels good to us.
a place that feels familiar
to us. that we don't pay
attention to the suffering.
We don't pay attention
to why it's problematic.
- I know you talked about
the force in your
presentation. but how do you
define freedom for yourself?
- I have been conditioned
to think of emancipation
as an ending point.
so I realized that freedom
was not just like liberation.
Freedom was like
owning your humanity.
operating in your
full humanity.
being recognized
for your full humanity.
I think that the
spirit of slavery.
that I talked about before.
that makes color a mark
of degradation is still
very much with us.
And I think for too long.
the onus of racism has been
put on people of color
to solve when this is not
really like a people
of color issue.
This is like a white
supremacist issue where white
people need to talk to other
white people about how they
can overcome these issues.
White allies today have
to take a very radical stance
and that they can't just.
you know. put up
the bumper sticker.
Black Lives Matter.
Are you going to allow your
child to be one of the few
whites in an all black school?
Are you going to invest
in that school making sure
that not just your child.
but every child
in that community gets a fair
shake? To balance like this
great injustice that's taking
place for hundreds of years
it requires sacrifice.
I don't know what that will
look like exactly for you
or for each person.
It's different.
I think the...
(reflective music)
- This is Pleasant Gardens.
This is where most
of the African-American
in the city were buried.
It was an operation
from 1891 through 1970.
Well. one that I saw
in the paper. an article about
an abandoned cemetery.
and so I thought.
I can't believe that there's
a place here that's so rich
with history and I
didn't know about it.
And so I use the map
on the front of the newspaper
and drove over to the cemetery
and found this beautiful place
and immediately felt the need
to organize some community
cleanups to bring
attention to it.
Many of the African-Americans
that are buried here were not
slaves. and so they could be
buried and recognized
in different ways.
But there's a very interesting
cemetery called
Beck Knob Cemetery
that's located on the
north side of the town.
And it was a slave cemetery.
And when you look
at how overgrown it is.
it's almost sad that
you can almost drive past it
and not even know it.
[Director] Would you
take us there?
- Yeah. I could take
you there.
but I don't know how much
you'll be able to see because
it's really overgrown.
(truck engine roaring)
Wow.
(truck engines)
I knew I wasn't crazy.
Look how close this
line is to that.
(peaceful music)
[Director] What has
been the most
important story that you've
talked about in history
class so far this year?
- Well. slavery was bad.
We should still feel guilty
because it's something
that happened.
[Director] But we
interviewed a kid
from Estonia and he has white
skin and his family
wasn't even here.
Should he feel
guilty about it?
- Well. if he's living
in our country now.
then I think he should feel
a little guilt because
it's still
part of his. it's still part
of his history.
because now he's part of our
country and he should
feel a little guilt.
I think.
[Director] Is guilt useful?
- Yes.
- Tell me why.
- Because it helps
us understand that
what we did was wrong
and we shouldn't go back
to doing it and we should
fix our ways so we can
do better in the future.
- I personally. like. slavery
is morally wrong.
Like you just shouldn't
own other people.
That's not something
that should happen.
But I see the reasoning
behind it and I can understand
it and not accept it.
but I guess.
see. like. behind it. I guess.
[Director] I think a lot
depends on whose
eyes you're looking through.
Right?
Are we talking about a
white point of view
or a black point of view?
A lot depends on
who you are. I think.
- I want to know. like.
what was your perspective
of the whole
slavery situation and how you
feel like. because you you
know. you being. you were
raised. like how do you feel
when people--
[Director] I feel like
it was wrong.
I feel like it
was deeply wrong.
But I also feel like
I never learned about
slavery as a white story.
I mean. most people around me.
we never talk about slavery as
something white people did
and benefited from. you know?
It was always just presented
as something
that just happened.
[Dr. Blight] I want to introduce
Ibram Kendi.
Ibram. you argue
that the current
threat of racism is more
insidious now than it
has been in the past.
[Ibram] Precisely.
Just as Lincoln said
that the nation will either
become
all one or all the other.
meaning slavery
or antislavery.
I think it's the same thing
for racism and anti-racism.
If we see America's history
of steady racial progress
that we have now reached
the mountaintop.
racism is no longer
critical and important.
We're also saying the cause
of racial inequities today
is not racism. because
we've moved beyond racism.
It's the inferiority
of particular people that are
not working hard enough.
(introspective music)
There was a racist idea
that is still very prominent
within the community of people
who consider themselves
liberal. even progressive
or even radical.
The oppression
inferiority thesis.
First. it was slavery making
black people into brutes.
Right now. it's poverty.
This idea that racism itself
or discrimination
wasn't just sort of harming
people. but it was literally
leading to inferior behaviors.
(introspective music)
[Director] When you walk
down the street
and people see you.
what do you want people
to think about you?
Do you think about that ever?
- I want them to
think that I'm
an intelligent girl
and I'm not bad.
I'm actually very
good and I'm smart.
[Director] What makes
you a very good?
- That I follow directions.
Well. sometimes.
[Director] What else?
- Um. I want them to think
that I'm not ugly.
(quiet music)
[Director] It seems
to me that one
of the major challenges
for you was a history teacher
would be teaching in a way
that connects with such
a diverse student body.
- Yes.
Yeah. it is.
[Director] Boston Latin
is kind of like
the nation in miniature
because it is so old
and it did start as
a segregated all
male institution.
- Yeah. it's the oldest school
in the country.
Was founded in 1635 by
a portion of the population
of Boston. England.
It was all male.
was all white.
It was all
people of privilege.
[Director] You know.
I've really come
to believe that part
of the purpose of history is
to tell a story
that unites us.
- Yeah.
- But in order
for that story to work.
we have to see ourselves as
being in the same
boat to begin with.
- Yeah.
- We have to see ourselves as
connected to other people.
- I really agree.
[Director] So in your
class today.
how do you tell a story
that helps these kids see
themselves as connected to all
the diverse people
that surround them?
- Well. it's important to talk
about race and the history.
And I want kids to understand
that where we are today
has its roots in the past.
But it's really hard to convey
the full scope of the way
the history of this
country plays out today.
And I think it's really
difficult to talk about race.
How do you actually help kids
to be different than us.
our generation.
who doesn't really know
how to do this very well?
How do you.
the only way you do
that is by having them do it.
Ok. I want to know what went
into place after
reconstruction.
Look at integration
of schools. fair
treatment by juries.
Those are the kinds of things.
How are we doing now?
We'll put the school
segregation folks
in that corner.
We'll put the jury selection
folks in the back corner
- With the black voting race.
I found that the 15th
Amendment.
it gave African-American males
the right to vote.
but they kept finding
loopholes to keep
them from voting.
And today. 13 percent are
prohibited from voting because
they have served in prison.
- Yeah?
- Ok. umm
well. I guess I'll say I guess
I think we're running out
of time. but I. I just think
talking about this is
really not helpful because
I mean. what it does is--
(school bell rings)
- Sit still.
- It puts people in an
unproductive
mindset. because what it does
is it makes white people feel
guilty and it makes black
people feel like victims.
- Don't go anywhere.
And I want to know
what people want to say back
to that. because I think it's
important that you have
a chance to say something.
So I'm going to go
with Andriana first.
- Like. if you're treated
differently because of
something you can't change.
why wouldn't you be a victim?
Like you don't have to talk
about something
to feel a certain way.
[Student] Have you?
- Yes.
- So I see all these hands
and we had a bell.
And I'm so sorry that we're
going to have to stop this.
but we will pick this up.
Look right where you are.
See your hands in the air?
Put your hands in the air.
This is where we
start tomorrow.
[Director] How did you
feel about the
conversation in
Section 41 today?
(gasps)
(nervous laughter)
- Terrified.
- The idea I wanted
to dismantle
is that there's like a system
in a place
like
that like
benefits white people
and like has a negative
effect on black people.
- I don't want
to squash this child.
He's. you know.
bringing sincere.
you know. and rigourous.
He's I think the
word he used was
logic.
He's thinking about
it logically.
And logic says that there's
got to be a reason for that.
But he doesn't have an answer
when I say. you know.
so what might be the reason if
you think it's not systemic
racism that has caused this.
what what is the reason?
And he says. I don't know.
- You shouldn't have something
to blame your problems on.
And I don't think that's--
I don't think that's
a good thing.
Asian-Americans here.
they have a hard time.
but they still succeed.
- That's going to be
continued tomorrow.
And I've got to spend my time
thinking tonight.
what am I going to say
that respects
how hard this kid is thinking
about these things.
which is exactly what I want
him to do and still push back
a little bit and say.
you know. so I think you're
missing some of the picture
here in a really
important way.
I gave you this document about
the Jim Crow era.
which was written by Michelle
Alexander in her book.
So as you're reading through
that. I want you thinking.
how did they recreate a lower
class based on race
after reconstruction?
- Black people in prison.
they auctioned off
the prisoners
to the highest bidder.
- There was a loophole about
slavery in the 13th Amendment.
Did anyone catch that?
- They outlawed slavery.
but it was fit
as a punishment for a crime.
- What she's trying to say is
that the criminal justice
system. it's literally like
the same thing as Jim Crow.
which is her point.
[Instructor] I think you would
say a new iteration of it.
That's what we're really
trying to look at.
is the ways
that that is still with us.
- That's assuming
Jim Crow has a--
[Instructor] A presence today?
- Yeah. that's your assumption.
- It is.
- That's not that's
not my assumption.
Asian-Americans are routinely
discriminated against when
applying for colleges.
They have to get about like
400 SAT points higher
than black people.
And also they're discriminated
against when they're
applying for jobs.
(school bell rings)
Your mind is so closed off
to certain ideas.
(students laugh)
- We'll continue.
We will continue.
I love that you hang in there.
- They're not willing to
consider certain ideas
because they've been taught to
[crosstalk]
- Yeah. but is the certain
idea that you're really
suggesting that Asians are
better than black people?
That's not what you're
really saying. is it?
- I mean.
I'm not saying they're
like inherently better.
I'm just saying their
situation is better right now.
- But what would you
attribute that to?
- Higher income.
higher representation
in colleges and in uhh--
- But why do you think
they have that?
And why do you think
black people don't?
- I don't know. I mean.
Asians are discriminated much
more in those areas
because--
- Than black people?
- Yes.
- We'll agree to disagree
on that point.
but we'll come back to it. Ok?
- Ok.
- All right.
- Well. I hope you. I
hope you look into that.
- I will look into it.
Good.
Thank you.
It's a revelation to me
that presenting.
no matter how much information
you present. sometimes
people are going to hear it
the way they want to hear it
and they're not going
to budge. at least not yet.
He's not.
But that's exactly what you're
in for when you open the door
to having these kinds
of conversations.
That's what's
hard to navigate.
(quiet music)
- We're celebrating
Confederate Heroes Day.
it's a Texas state holiday
celebrated on the 19th
of January every year.
which is also
Robert E. Lee's birthday.
- The bill was filed by a
representative from Pensacola.
It says that a memorial can't
be moved unless it needs
to be refurbished.
- This monument right here
outside the old courthouse
in downtown Pittsboro was
given to the county by the
Daughters of the Confederacy
back in the early 1900's.
- I'm in favor of the
statues staying.
A lot of ancestors of mine
had fought and died.
And they didn't
die for slavery.
They had no slaves.
(applause)
(crowd chanting and yelling)
[Crowd] Pull! Pull!
(crowd yelling and cheering)
(applause)
- Story starts with seeing
the monuments.
but it's also about being
in this black body.
What does that feel like
to have your country.
your nation say this
is what we stand by?
No. We want more.
we demand more.
We say yes to something
that looks like us.
We say yes to inclusivity.
We say yes to broader notions
of what it means
to be an American.
(dramatic music)